In this video we are continuing on our exploration of polynomials and working with polynomials in python.
In particular, here I'm going to focus on multiplying polynomials.
Now before I tell you how to multiply polynomials I want to give you a quick reminder of the law of
exponents.
This is something that I covered in a previous video, in a previous section actually.
So the idea is that if you have multiple variables that are multiplying each other and that have exponents
you can add the exponents as long as the base is the same.
So this is X to the A and X to the B and that equals x the A plus B.
However, the Y and the X cannot be combined here Because Y is a different base from X.
So with that as a quick reminder of the law of exponents, multiplying polynomials is actually pretty
straightforward.
So if have one polynomial here and this is a second polynomial.
Then the product between these two polynomials is this.
It's pretty long but it's not really difficult to compute.
Essentially what you have to do is expand all of the multiplications.
So this term X to the five, times this term gives you x to the six, and then you have this term times
this term.
Now the X is the same here.
So we get X to the six and then of course the minus three and the Y. And then you keep going through
this procedure methodically.
It takes a little while but eventually you will get to the final answer.
And then if you have any like terms then you can combine them.
But in this case there are no common terms that are combinable.
For example, if this were X times Y to the two, if this were y squared, then these two terms could be combined.
However it's not possible to combine them because this is y squared and this is y cubed.
Of course if these were multiplying each other you could combine them.
But these are being subtracted. So once you know how to create polynomials and you know how to add them
and subtract them from the previous video, multiplying polynomials isn't really too much different.
So let's start by importing the sympy module as well as the display and math functions for nice
printing.
So let's start by creating a symbolic variable, so I'll say sym dot symbols X. And then just to show you the law
of exponents again.
So here I have X to the fifth power times X to the let's say x to the third and now the result here
is going to be X to the eighth power, because these two terms are multiplying each other and
their bases are the same.
Of course if we were to add them then we just get the same thing.
Basically we get X to the fifth plus X of the third.
It's not possible in this case to reduce this expression any further.
Okay.
So this was a pretty simple multiplication between two polynomials.
Let's try something slightly more complicated, so I'll say P1 for polynomial 1.
Let's set that to be four times X squared minus two times x.
And then let's set polynomial two to be.
How about X cubed minus one.
So now I can write P1 times P3 -- oops! P2.
Now in this case sympy didn't actually write out all the expansion; it just left it exactly how I
wrote it.
So this polynomial times this polynomial. If you want this to be expanded you can use the sympy function
expand.
So sympy dot expand and that will actually multiply out all the terms and we can have a quick look
to make sure that this is all going as we expected it to.
So you have this term times this term and that's going to be four times x to the fifth power because
you have X squared and X cubed here.
So that's this term over here.
All right.
So now I think this looks kind of ugly.
So what I'm going to do is expand this out using LaTeX formatting.
So let's say I want display and then math and then sympy latex and then the expand function.
All right.
So this looks pretty good.
And then just out of curiosity I'm going to get rid of this expand.
So now these two lines are almost exactly the same except here I'm explicitly expanding the multiplication.
And here I just have the multiplication in here like this.
And here you see the difference in the output between just multiplying the polynomials versus putting
the product of the polynomials through this expand function.
The exercise for this video is to implement these two polynomials here.
So I'm calling it f of x and y and G of X and Y.
These are just two functions of x and of Y.
So implement these two polynomials and then what you want to do is first multiply the polynomials together.
So like I showed in the previous slide before switching to Python code.
So multiply these two polynomials and then in the product, substitute X for five and y for minus two
and you'll get some answer.
It's going to be some number.
And then what you want to do is substitute the same numbers.
So X equals five AND Y equals minus two.
But now you're substituting into each polynomial individually and then you multiply those two numbers
so this.
So you substitute these two numbers for these two variables into f of x and y.
That's going to give you... whatever number it is.
And then you substitute these numbers into G of X and Y and then we'll give you some other number and
then you multiply those two results. And then the goal is to test whether those two numbers are the same.
So whether it matters whether you multiply and then substitute or substitute and then multiply.
All right.
So good luck.
I hope you have fun working through this exercise.
And now I'm going to switch to Python and show you how I solve this. All right so let's see.
So the first thing I'm going to do is we need to create another symbolic variable for Y.
Let's say X comma Y equals in that symbols X and Y.
And now what I'm gonna do is create these two polynomials using these symbolic variables.
So F of X and Y was four times x to the fourth power.
I'm rearranging some of the terms a little bit here just to get the terms with the highest order the
highest degree to be on the left.
So then we had nine times Y cubed minus three times X squared plus X times Y squared.
All right.
And then we had G of X and Y and that was point eight times y cubed.
And again I'm rewriting these terms slightly and then we had X cubed and then plus six times X squared
times y.
Okay.
And again if you are uncertain about whether this is X squared,
so whether this is X squared times Y, or whether python is going to implement X to the power of two times
Y, then you have to remember the PEMDAS, so please excuse my dear and Sally: parentheses exponent multiplication
division addition and subtraction.
Okay.
So if we leave out the parentheses then the exponent takes priority over the multiplication.
So this is going to give us the right answer.
Okay.
Now out of curiosity I would like to print these, so let's say display math and now I'm going to write
percent
s times the second very polynomial.
So this one's going to be four G of X equals.
And then whatever this happens to equal.
All right.
So we need sym
dot latex f of x and y.
And then we need sym dot latex G of X and Y.
And then we need sym dot latex and then sym dot expand F of X and Y times.
G of X and Y.
OOOOFF!!!
What a long long long polynomial this is!
Wow, that's really long.
All right so now let's get to the main part of the assignment.
So we want to substitute xval
was 5 and the y value was minus 2.
So the first thing that I'm going to do is multiply the polynomials and then substitute for x and y.
So let's call this F G equals.
Now I could create a separate variable and say F X Y times g x y and then in a different line I could
say the answer is f g that subs and so on.
But actually, it's a little bit easier than this and that is because I can actually put these two -- the
product of these two polynomials -- inside parentheses and then create this or treat this as a single sympy
object and then dot subs and now here you'll remember that this can be entered as a dictionary.
So the x gets replaced with XVal, and the Y is replaced as yval.
So let me first run this and make sure that this works.
Okay so we get some answer and I think I'll even print this out right away.
So let's say print multiplied solutions is and then
percent G.
And then here we have percent f g.
Okay so this is the answer here.
And actually I will change this to a string so it formats using a nicer looking number.
By the way, if you are confused about how to interpret this thing -- so minus 1 and then there's the E plus
0 6.
This has to do with orders of magnitude and scientific notation.
I'm going to have a whole video (maybe even two videos) about that in a later section of the course, in
algebra 2.
So you don't really need to worry about this too much.
now. Essentially this is just pushing the decimal point six places over to the left.
Okay.
So anyway for now I will leave this as s, so it prints out as a full number.
So that was the first step.
Then what we need to do is substitute for x and y in each function separately so let's call that f x
y and maybe ans, equals f x y
subs, and actually this is exactly the same substitution.
I'm just going to copy and paste here and then.
In fact I will copy and paste this entire line, being really careful to change the F's for G's.
And then I will print this out.
Let's say print separate solutions comes to percent s and then we say F X Y and times g x g x y ans.
So that's pretty interesting: we get exactly the same results whether we multiply the polynomials and
then substitute or first substitute and then multiply the answers.
Now the reason why this is the case is that these are linear operations -- we've just been doing all linear
operations here: multiplications and additions.
And in general, when you are performing linear operations the order of operations tends not to matter.
And when you're doing non-linear operations, nonlinear computations, then the order actually does matter.
So in this video I showed you more about polynomials and working with polynomials in Python and sympy.
And in particular I focused on multiplying.
Of course the inverse of multiplying is division, and I will show you in the next video how to divide
polynomials. I look forward to seeing you then.